---
title: Party Advancement
parent: Advancement
grand_parent: The Basics
nav_order: 2
---

# Party Advancement
At the end of the session, review the party xp triggers and mark 1 party xp for each item that occurred during the session. If an item occurred multiple times or in a major way, mark 2 party xp for it. The party xp triggers are:
* **Your party-specific xp trigger.** For example, the Cults’ is "*advance the agenda of your deity or embody its precepts in action*". If the party successfully completed a quest from this trigger, mark xp.
* **Contend with challenges above your current station.** If you tangled with higher Tiers or more dangerous opposition, mark xp for this.
* **Bolster your party's reputation or develop a new one.** Review your party's reputation. Did you do anything to promote it? Also mark xp if you developed a new reputation for the party.
* **Express the goals, drives, inner conflict, or essential nature of the party.** This one is very broad! Essentially, did anything happen that highlighted the specific elements that make your party unique?

**When you fill your party advancement tracker**, clear the marks and take a new **special ability** or mark **two party upgrade boxes**.

> For example, when a party of Slayers earns a party advance, they could take a new special ability, like **Predators**. Or they could mark two upgrades, like a **Vault** and **Resolve Training**.

Say how you've obtained this new ability or upgrades for the party. *Where did it come from? How does it become a new part of the party?*

## Profits
Every time the party advances, **each PC gets stash** equal to the crew Tier+2, to represent profits generated by the party as they've been adventuring.
