---
title: Advancement
parent: The Basics
nav_order: 16
---

# Advancement

## PC Advancement
Each player keeps track of the experience points (**xp**) that their character earns.

During the game session, mark xp:
* When you make a **desperate action roll**. Mark 1 xp in the attribute for the action you rolled. For example, if you roll a desperate **Skirmish** action, you mark xp in **Prowess**. When you roll in a group action that's desperate, you also mark xp.

When you settle in to rest, review the **xp triggers** on your character sheet. For each one, mark 1 xp if it happened at all, or mark 2 xp if it happened a lot during the session. The xp triggers are:
* **Your playbook-specific xp trigger.** For example, the Warrior's is "address a challenge with violence or coercion". To "address a challenge", your character should attempt to overcome a tough obstacle or threat. It doesn't matter if the action is successful or not. You get xp either way.
* **You expressed your beliefs, drives, heritage, or background.** To express any one of these aspects of your character means that their behaviour can be clearly traced back to that aspect of them. Your character's beliefs and drives are yours to define from session to session. Tell the group about them when you mark xp. Alternatively, if events result in a significant turning point in your character's personal development, you may mark xp for that instead.
* **You struggled with issues from your vice or traumas.** Mark xp for this if your vice tempted you to some bad action or if a trauma condition caused you trouble. Simply indulging your vice doesn't count as struggling with it (unless you **overindulge**, see **Vice**).

You may mark this xp on any xp tracks you want (any attribute or your playbook xp track).

When you fill an xp track, clear all the marks and take an **advance**. When you take an advance from your playbook track, you may choose an additional **special ability**. When you take an advance from an attribute, you may add an **additional action dot** to one of the actions under that attribute.

You can also earn xp by **training** during downtime. When you train, mark xp in one of your attributes or in your playbook. A given xp track can be trained only once per downtime phase. See Training.

> *Trent is playing a Disciple. At the end of the session, he reviews his xp triggers and tells the group how much xp he’s getting. He rolled two desperate Channel actions during the session, so he marked 2 xp on his Resolve xp track. He addressed several challenges with knowledge or divine power, so he marks 2 xp for that. He expressed his Dwarven heritage many times when dealing with Kazad Grim, so he takes 2 xp for that. He also showcased his character’s beliefs, but 2 xp is the maximum for that category, so he doesn't get any more. He didn't struggle with his vice or traumas, so no xp there. That's 4 xp at the end of the session. He decides to put it all in his Resolve xp track. This fills the track, so he adds a new action dot in Channel.*

## Party Advancement
At the end of the session, review the party xp triggers and mark 1 party xp for each item that occurred during the session. If an item occurred multiple times or in a major way, mark 2 party xp for it. The party xp triggers are:
* **Your party-specific xp trigger.** For example, the Cults’ is "*advance the agenda of your deity or embody its precepts in action*". If the party successfully completed a quest from this trigger, mark xp.
* **Contend with challenges above your current station.** If you tangled with higher Tiers or more dangerous opposition, mark xp for this.
* **Bolster your party's reputation or develop a new one.** Review your party's reputation. Did you do anything to promote it? Also mark xp if you developed a new reputation for the party.
* **Express the goals, drives, inner conflict, or essential nature of the party.** This one is very broad! Essentially, did anything happen that highlighted the specific elements that make your party unique?

**When you fill your party advancement tracker**, clear the marks and take a new **special ability** or mark **two party upgrade boxes**.

> For example, when a party of Slayers earns a party advance, they could take a new special ability, like **Predators**. Or they could mark two upgrades, like a **Vault** and **Resolve Training**.

Say how you've obtained this new ability or upgrades for the party. *Where did it come from? How does it become a new part of the party?*

### Profits
Every time the party advances, **each PC gets stash** equal to the crew Tier+2, to represent profits generated by the party as they've been adventuring.

## Changing Playbooks or Party Type
A player might want to change their character to a different playbook (a Warrior becomes a Rogue), or the group may decide to shift their crew to a new type (Slayers become a Cult). There are two ways to do this.

* The change represents a "rebuild" of the character or party. For instance, if the PC was created as a Rogue, but after a couple sessions, the player realises that the Ranger playbook is a better fit for what they want to play. In this case, re-create the character or crew anew using the new sheet, keeping the same number of advances already earned.
* The change represents growth into something new, leaving the old life behind. In this case, transfer the action ratings of a PC or the upgrades of a crew to the new sheet (keeping the same total number of action dots or upgrades; you don’t get the “free” elements of the new playbook as extra advancement). You may keep some of the special abilities already earned as Veteran advances.
